--- PAGINA 1 ---
Citation: Can, O.F.; Celik, N.; Ozgen,
F.; Kistak, C.; Taskiran, A.
Experimental and Numerical Analysis
of the Solar Collector with Stainless
Steel Scourers Added to the Absorber
Surface. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2629.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app14062629
Received: 13 February 2024
Revised: 15 March 2024
Accepted: 19 March 2024
Published: 21 March 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
Experimental and Numerical Analysis of the Solar Collector with
Stainless Steel Scourers Added to the Absorber Surface
Omer Faruk Can 1
 , Nevin Celik 2,*
 , Filiz Ozgen 3, Celal Kistak 2 and Ali Taskiran 2
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Dicle University, Diyarbakir 21280, Turkey; faruk.can@dicle.edu.tr
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Firat University, Elazig 23119, Turkey; ckistak@firat.edu.tr (C.K.);
ataskiran@firat.edu.tr (A.T.)
3 Technology Faculty, Firat University, Elazig 23279, Turkey; fozgen@firat.edu.tr
* Correspondence: nevincelik23@gmail.com; Tel.: +90-5325212837
Abstract: In this study, a numerical and experimental analysis of a solar collector with roughness
elements in the form of stainless-steel scourers on the absorber surface is presented. According
to the location type and number of the stainless steel scourers, the absorber surfaces are referred
to as the complex surface (C1), less complex surface (C2), and flat surface (C3). A Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) analysis was carried out using ANSYS-CFX-R18.2 commercial software. The
results were verified with the experimental study. After the numerical study was confirmation with
the experimental study, then the detailed investigation was performed by numerical simulations.
The extracted results of the numerical and experimental analysis concerned the air temperature
and velocity, and thermal efficiency, which varied with respect to the type of collector. As a result,
the C1 type yielded the highest air velocity and air temperature, while the lowest values of air
velocity and temperature were recorded for the C3 type, according to both the numerical analysis
and experimental tests. This trend was similar for the efficiencies. The efficiency was nearly 80%
for collectors with stainless-steel scourers, whilst it was 55% for the flat plate collector. The results
showed that the experimental and numerical results agreed well.
Keywords: solar collectors; absorber surface; numerical analysis
1. Introduction
When compared to other energy sources, solar energy has drawn a lot of attention as
a reliable and efficient way to address the growing global energy demand [1]. Photovoltaic
panels can be used to convert solar energy directly into electricity or heat at different
temperatures. In addition, it is a clean, free energy source that contributes to reducing
global warming. But in order to transform solar radiation into usable energy, certain highly
efficient equipment is required.
There are various arrangements for solar air collectors. Their inexpensive cost, straight-
forward structure, and design define them. However, because of their low heat transfer
coefficient, air solar collectors have low thermal efficiency. Numerous studies have bee n
carried out to improve this crucial component in order to improve the thermal performance
of air solar collectors. The absorber plate of the air solar collector has undergone a number
of changes in an effort to improve heat transfer [2].
A good method of raising the radiative heat transfer is to add artificial roughness,
namely surface-enhancing elements that break the laminar sub-layer and cause turbulence
to occur over the absorber plate. Nonetheless, there are several drawbacks to manufactured
roughness that are associated with friction losses. Therefore, research on various forms of
artificial roughness is required, along with optimization of the crucial elements of pressure
loss and heat transfer. Fins that are inclined, triangular, circular, elliptical, or rectangular
in shape are among the several geometric shapes and artificial roughness forms that have
been suggested and studied [1,2].
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2629. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14062629 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
--- PAGINA 2 ---
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2629 2 of 15
Kishk et al. [2] presented a novel concept that addresses environmental concerns by
utilizing recyclable aluminum cans as the absorber plate for an air solar collector. The results
showed that by adding the cans to the absorber surface, the thermal efficiency increased
from 25% to 63%. Yadav et al. [ 3] numerically investigated the effect of adding circular
and semi-circular ribs to the surface of a solar air heater. The results showed that the semi-
circular rib gives the highest performance. Njomo [4] studied unsteady-state heat exchange
mechanisms that governed the functioning of a bare single-pass solar collector, using non-
porous selective absorbers. The derived mathematical model was subsequently utilized to
forecast the thermal efficiency of this kind of collector. The installation of surface-enhancing
elements in the form of ribs on the absorber plate under turbulent flow conditions was
investigated numerically by Chaube et al. [ 5]. It was shown that the heat transfer was
much improved as compared to a smooth surface. Pashchenko et al. [6] investigated how
technological and design factors affected the thermal and aerodynamic processes occurring
in a solar air heater with light-absorbing L-shaped fins. They discovered that the solar air
heater with fins, had high thermo-aerodynamic characteristics. Karim and Hawlader [7]
conducted both theoretical and experimental analysis using finned and V-corrugated air
heaters to enhance the effectiveness of traditional air heaters. Ammar et al. [ 8] created
a 3D steady-state CFD model of a flat-plate solar air collector with a selective absorber
under steady-state conditions. They discovered an 81% enhancement in thermal efficiency.
Badiei et al. [9] developed a 3D CFD transient model of a solar collector with fins that were
incorporated into the phase change materials. The thermal efficiency increased from 33% to
46% when using the fins with phase change materials. Panchal et al. [10] presented a report
related to a performance evaluation of using a tube solar collector with perforated fins. They
showed that surface-enhancing fins increased the efficiency and hence decreased the cost
of energy. Saxena et al. [11] presented an experimental study including the modification
of a solar cooker. It was determined that the modification provided 53 percent efficiency
compared to the traditional type solar cooker. It was determined that the modification
provided 53.81% efficiency compared to the conventional solar cooker.
Overall, the use of surface enhancing elements on the absorber surface of solar collec-
tors plays a crucial role in maximizing their efficiency and effectiveness in harnessing solar
energy for heating purposes. Therefore, in this study, we sought to improve the efficiency
of solar collectors by adding stainless steel scourers on the absorber surface. Since the cost
of stainless-steel scourers is low, it is very easy to find them around the world, and their
porous structure is unique. The usability of them in the context of solar collectors as surface
enhancing elements was investigated in the present study. For this purpose, the effects of
stainless-steel scourers placed on the absorber surface on air velocity, temperature, and
collector efficiency have been investigated numerically and experimentally.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Experimental Study
The experimental setup was previously used by a co-author of present study [12,13].
The general setup included a solar air heater, namely a solar collector that was 120 cm
in length, 80 cm in width, and 40 cm in height. It should be noted that, in order to
make the values realistic, the dimensions of a frequently sold collector produced by a
collector company were taken as basis. Its transparent cover, casing material, and insulation
material consisted of 4 mm-thick window glass, 3 cm-thick Styrofoam, and chipboard wood,
correspondingly. The collector faced south and was tilted at a 38◦ horizontal inclination.
Figure 1 depicts a picture of the experimental arrangement.
As mentioned above, this study aimed to analyze a solar collector system with stainless-
steel scourers on the absorber surface. Stainless-steel scourers are mostly used in homes
for cleaning and scrubbing tasks. Three “handfuls” in a packet cost only around USD 1,
indicating that the inclusion of scourers has no financial impact on the overall collector
system cost. This substance is structured like metal “swarf”, which is metal cuttings
from metal turning operations. It has a very regular rectangular cross section, typically
--- PAGINA 3 ---
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 2629 3 of 15
400–500 µm by 20–30 µm, and is fashioned into “disks” that fit in the palm of a human
hand. Since this is a “random structure” material, one must carefully press the material to
the proper bulk density (or porosity) while accounting for the “rectangular wire’s” actual
average cross section in order to manage the hydraulic radius [14,15].
Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 15 
 
 
Figure 1. Experimental setup. 
As mentioned above, this study aimed to analyze a solar collector system with stain-
less-steel scourers on the abso rber surface. Stainless-steel scourers are mostly used in 
homes for cleaning and scrubbing tasks. Three “handfuls” in a packet cost only around 
USD 1, indicating that the inclusion of scourers has no ﬁnancial impact on the overall 
collector system cost. This substance is structured like metal “swarf”, which is metal cut-
tings from metal turning operations. It has a very regular rectangular cross section, typi-
cally 400–500 µm by 20–30 µm, and is fashioned into “disks” that ﬁt in the palm of a hu-
man hand. Since this is a “random structure” material, one must carefully press the mate-
rial to the proper bulk density (or porosity) while accounting for the “rectangular wire’s” 
actual average cross section in order to manage the hydraulic radius [14,15]. 
The most important part of the solar air co llector is the absorber surface. Three dif-
ferent absorbing surfaces were used in the experimental study. The construction of ab-
sorber surfaces guarantees the availability of air ﬂow on both sides of the surface to in-
crease eﬃciency. The absorber surfaces were created using 180 porous steel wool, which 
was attached to the top and bo ttom of a 1.5 mm-thick galvanized sheet with a type of 
silicone glue. This sheet was coated with black matte paint to form a surface that absorbs 
radiation, consistent with the bonding procedure. The ﬁrst of the absorber surfaces con-
tained 102 scourers in a complex arrangemen t (C1), as displayed in Figure 2a, and the 
second contained 78 scourers in a regular row (C2), as presented in Figure 2b. No scourer 
was used on the third absorber surface (C3), as shown in Figure 2c. 
Figure 1. Experimental setup.
The most important part of the solar air collector is the absorber surface. Three differ-
ent absorbing surfaces were used in the experimental study. The construction of absorber
surfaces guarantees the availability of airflow on both sides of the surface to increase effi-
ciency. The absorber surfaces were created using 180 porous steel wool, which was attached
to the top and bottom of a 1.5 mm-thick galvanized sheet with a type of silicone glue. This
sheet was coated with black matte paint to form a surface that absorbs radiation, consistent
with the bonding procedure. The first of the absorber surfaces contained 102 scourers in a
complex arrangement (C1), as displayed in Figure 2a, and the second contained 78 scourers
in a regular row (C2), as presented in Figure 2b. No scourer was used on the third absorber
surface (C3), as shown in Figure 2c.
The experiments were carried out in the city of Elazig, located in the Middle East
region of Turkey, in a one-month period between the 1st and 30th of July in 2020. The
measurements were conducted with two air flow rates (0.05 and 0.025 kg/s) and three
distinct absorber surface geometries (C1, C2, and C3). The inlet and outlet air temperature
and 4-point surface temperatures were the obtained parameters that were thought to affect
efficiency. Hence, a comprehensive numerical analysis was performed to obtain more
information. The following section introduces the numerical analysis.
