--- PAGINA 1 ---
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 12, No. 5, 2022, 9282-9294  9282  
 
www.etasr.com Guerraiche et al.: Heat Transfer Enha ncement in a Receiver Tube of Solar Collector Using Various … 
 
Heat Transfer Enhancement in a Receiver Tube of 
Solar Collector Using Various Materials and 
Nanofluids 
 
Djemaa Guerraiche 
Applied Energy Physics Laboratory (LPEA) 
Department of Physics 
Faculty of Matter Sciences 
University of Batna 1 
Batna, Algeria  
d.guerraiche@gmail.com 
Khelifa Guerraiche  
Mechanical Engineering Department 
Faculty of Technology 
University of Batna 2 
Batna, Algeria 
guer.khelifa@yahoo.com 
Zied Driss 
Laboratory of Electromechanical Systems (LASEM) 
National School of Engineers of Sfax (ENIS) 
University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia 
zied.driss@enis.tn 
Atef Chibani  
Department of Chemical Engineering 
University Salah Boubnider Constantine 3 
Constantine, Algeria 
chibaniatef@gmail.com 
Slimane Merouani 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
University Salah Boubnider Constantine 3 
Constantine, Algeria 
s.merouani@yahoo.fr 
Cherif Bougriou 
Mechanical Engineering Department 
Faculty of Technology, University of Batna 2 
Batna, Algeria 
c.bougriou@univ-batna2.dz 
 
Received: 21 July 2022 | Revised: 5 August 2022 | Accepted: 8 August 2022 
 
Abstract-The solar flux distribution on the Parabol ic Trough 
Collector (PTC) absorber tube is extremely non-unif orm, which 
causes non-uniform temperature distribution outside  the 
absorber tube. Therefore, it generates high thermal  stress which 
causes creep and fatigue damage. This presents a ch allenge to the 
efficiency and reliability of parabolic trough rece ivers. To 
override this problem, we have to homogenize the he at flux 
distribution and enhance the heat transfer in the r eceiver’s 
absorber tube to improve the performance of the PTC . In this 
work, 3D thermal and thermal stress analyses of PTC  receiver 
performance were investigated with a combination of  Monte 
Carlo Ray-Trace (MCRT), Computational Fluid Dynamic s 
(CFD) analysis, and thermal stress analysis using t he static 
structural module of ANSYS. At first, we studied th e effect of the 
receiver tube material (aluminium, copper, and stai nless steel) on 
heat transfer. The temperature gradients and the th ermal 
stresses were compared. Second, we studied the effe ct of the 
addition of nanoparticles on the working Heat Trans fer Fluid 
(HTF), employing an Al 2O3-H2O based nanofluid at various 
volume concentrations. To improve the thermal perfo rmance of 
the PTC, a nanoparticle volume concentration ratio of 1%–6% is 
required. The results show that the temperature gra dients and 
thermal stresses of stainless steel are significant ly higher than 
those of aluminium and copper. From the standpoint of thermal 
stress, copper is recommended as the tube receiver material. 
Using Al 2O3 in water as an HTF increases the average output 
temperature by 2%, 6%, and 10% under volume concent rations 
of 0%, 2%, and 6% respectively. The study concluded  that the 
thermal efficiency increases from 3% to 14% for nan oparticle 
volume fractions ranging from 2% to 6%. 
Keywords-heat transfer; nanofluids; solar concentra tor; 
receiver; non-uniform heat flux; temperature gradients 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The use of renewable energies has become essential to the 
reduction of the consumption of fossil resources an d the 
production of carbon dioxide (CO 2), which is the main gas 
responsible for the greenhouse effect. The technolo gy of 
Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) can meet the demands  for 
thermal and electrical energy. The benefits of usin g a CSP 
technology with a PTC system are: it is best suited  for a wide 
range of industrial applications and can contribute  to thermal 
energy production, which can have significant econo mic, 
environmental, and social implications [1]. Recentl y, the PTC 
has been developing towards a higher concentration ratio and 
operating temperature for the purposes of reducing the 
Corresponding author: Djemaa Guerraiche 
--- PAGINA 2 ---
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 12, No. 5, 2022, 9282-9294  9283  
 
www.etasr.com Guerraiche et al.: Heat Transfer Enha ncement in a Receiver Tube of Solar Collector Using Various … 
 
investment cost and improving its thermal efficienc y, 
especially at high temperatures. This is an importa nt goal in 
order for these technologies to be energetically an d financially 
viable [2]. However, the PTC suffers from several p roblems 
and failures, especially concentrated solar Non-Uni form Heat 
Flux (NUHF) distribution on the outer surface of th e absorber 
tube. In addition, the heat flux is small near the top wall where 
the collimated energy is incident and is large near  the bottom 
wall [3]. NUHF causes high local temperature and bi g 
temperature gradient in solar receivers due to the restricted 
thermal conductivity of the receiver tube and the t hermal 
convection capacity inside the tube, producing an i ncrease in 
thermal stress. This causes the absorber tube to de viate from 
the focal plane and large increase in optical losse s because the 
selective coating degrades when the local temperatu re is too 
high, limiting the maximum working temperature. All  these 
issues represent challenges that will have a long-t erm impact 
on the PTC's efficiency and safety [4]. Authors in [5] 
discovered that the maximum temperature differentia l for safe 
functioning of receiver tubes is around 50K. Furthe rmore, 
strong temperature gradients have many repercussion s 
circumferentially, which may be summed by the defle ction of 
the absorber tube. This causes the absorber tube to deviate from 
the concentrator's focus line, causing optical loss . When the 
local temperature is too high, the selective coatin g degrades, 
limiting the maximum operating temperature. As a result of the 
thermal breakdown of the HTF, hydrogen production a nd 
penetration occur [6], resulting in increasing heat loss, material 
degradation, heat stress, and deformation of the ab sorber tube. 
These pose significant obstacles to the concentrate d solar 
system's safe and efficient functioning. To solve t his issue, we 
must homogenize the heat flow distribution by flatt ening the 
temperature distribution, lowering the peak temperature and the 
temperature gradient. Recent studies have concentra ted on 
improving thermal transfer and thermal distribution uniformity. 
A simple solution to flattening the temperature distribution is to 
homogenize the flow distribution. Heat transfer enh ancement 
technology can reduce thermal losses and thermal st ress while 
increasing heat transfer rates between the absorber  tube and 
HTF at a low cost. The solutions can be roughly cla ssified into 
three groups: Improvements to the tube's thermal co nductivity, 
collector optimization to homogenize solar energy, and 
augmentation of convective heat transfer within the  absorber 
tube [7]. 
Receiver tubes are subjected to a harsh operating 
environment. To alleviate the extreme operating conditions and 
ensure the receiver's durability, dependability, an d integrity 
throughout its lifecycle, special consideration was  required 
when selecting the receiver material. High corrosion resistance, 
optimal physical and mechanical properties, excelle nt 
fabricability, and a higher capacity for flux densi ty are all 
critical criteria. Several solutions have been adop ted by 
enhancing the thermal conductivity of the absorber tube and 
employing an absorber with thermal compensator and heat 
transfer improvement techniques [8]. Using selective materials, 
solution techniques aimed to improve the thermal co nductivity 
of the absorber tube have been proposed for the PTC  receiver. 
Authors in [9] conducted a structural and thermal a nalysis of a 
PTC absorber tube to investigate the effect of mate rial 
variations on temperature distribution flattening. Steel, copper, 
aluminium, and bimetallic materials (Cu-Fe) have be en 
investigated. They concluded that when using copper , the 
circumferential temperature non-uniformity was less  bending 
due to less thermal load than using steel. Using a bimetallic 
tube improves temperature distribution and reduces maximum 
deflection by 45–49%. Authors in [2] presented an 
experimental investigation in which the steel tube was replaced 
with a copper tube. The reduced bending of the abso rber tube 
was caused by the lower circumferential temperature variations 
due to copper's strong thermal conductivity. 
II.  H
OMOGENIZING SOLAR FLUX DISTRIBUTION  
A more straightforward way to flatten the temperatu re 
distribution appears to be the homogenization of th e flux 
distribution. Several researchers proposed innovati ve 
concentrators for flux homogenization. The heat flo w gradient 
in the absorber tube must be reduced and homogenize d. 
Authors in [10] proposed improvements based on the 
conventional PTC and a secondary reflector was adde d 
overhead the tube. The numerical results showed tha t the heat 
flux gradient was reduced by 70.37%, and the temper ature 
gradient from 159.39K to 24.16K. Authors in [11] us ed a 
variable focus PTC, in which the focal length varie d as a 
function of the reflector's motion relative to the receiver, 
significantly enhanced the flux distribution's homo geneity. 
Authors in [12] placed a secondary reflector within  the annular 
gap in order to reflect more sun rays onto the top of the 
absorber. Authors in [13] investigated the heat flux distribution 
on the outside surface of the PTC absorber tube in order to 
lower the tube's temperature gradient by relocating the absorber 
tube away from the focal line and toward the parabo la and 
adding a secondary reflector. The results show that  installing 
another reflector overhead the absorber tube improv es the heat 
flux distribution and reduces heat flux gradient by 70.37%. 
III.  H
EAT TRANSFER ENHANCEMENT AND OPTIMIZATION  
Heat transfer improvement might result in a more un iform 
temperature distribution in the metal tube, reducin g thermal 
deformation in the receiving tube. For the PTC rece iver, a 
number of strategies for enhancing convective heat transfer 
have been proposed. Authors in [14] used an absorbe r with a 
thermal compensator at the parabolic dish concentra ted solar 
receiver, which contains a Phase Change Material (P CM) to 
produce uniform heat distribution. Thermal performa nce is 
improved by using PCMs as thermal energy storage. 
Homogeneous temperature distribution was observed o n the 
PCM integrated receiver in the absence of solar rad iation. A 
non-uniform temperature distribution was discovered  during 
the charging of the PCM included within the solar r eceiver. 
Authors in [15] presented a novel PTC receiver desi gn based 
on a concentric absorber tube filled with PCM. The absorber 
was regarded as a component of transitory thermal heat storage. 
The results validated the suggested design and veri fied that 
combining PTC and PCM in the receiver peripheral ca n 
improve the thermal performance of the provided sys tem. In 
[16], for solar cascade heat collection, a new PTC with a 
concentric receiver tube based on two HTFs, Sylther m-800 oil, 
was presented. The findings revealed that the absor ber tube's 
peak temperature and circumferential temperature gr adient 
--- PAGINA 3 ---
Engineering, Technology & Applied Science Research  Vol. 12, No. 5, 2022, 9282-9294  9284  
 
www.etasr.com Guerraiche et al.: Heat Transfer Enha ncement in a Receiver Tube of Solar Collector Using Various … 
 
were lower than regular PTC at the same mass flow r ate. The 
absorber tube's maximum temperature and temperature  
difference lowered to 66K and 65K respectively. For  the PTC 
receiver, several strategies for improving convecti ve heat 
transfer have been proposed. This technology employ s helical 
swirl generators, treated areas, vortex generators,  displacement 
increase devices, extended surfaces, jagged surface s, and 
nanoparticles [17]. According to these studies, the  peak 
temperature and temperature gradient can be minimiz ed. In 
[18], the impact of swirl inserts with and without nanofluids on 
PTCs with non-uniform heating flux was examined. The results 
showed that combining the swirl inserts and nanoflu ids 
improved the Nusselt number by 57.4% while the maxi mum 
reduction in thermal losses was 23%. The Nusselt nu mber, on 
the other hand, was enhanced by 15.57% when utilizi ng 
nanofluid only. 
The working fluid is one of the most important components 
of a solar receiver since it plays an important rol e in heat 
transmission. During the last 25 years, nanotechnol ogy has 
found applications in solar energy production. The use of 
nanofuids has transformed material science, and they have been 
used as potential alternative fluid solutions for i ncreasing the 
efficiency and profitability of thermal systems. Ad ding 
nanoparticles to the heating fluid presents the bes t solution to 
improve thermal conductivity and thermo-physical an d heat 
transfer properties of the fluid [19]. In fact, nan ofluids have a 
favorable effect on the performance of the PTC. The  heat 
transfer performance obtainable with nanofluids is known to 
surpass the performance of heat transfer liquids available today 
[20]. The most used nanofluids contain nanoparticle s such as 
Al, Fe 2O3, Al 2O3, Cu, TiO 2, and SiO 2 [21]. Some studies on the 
use of nanofluids for solar energy harvesting are a vailable in 
the literature. For example, authors in [22] invest igated the 
application of nanofluids in concentrating a solar PTC. The 
effect of several nanofluids employed as working fl uid on the 
performance of solar thermal collectors was studied  
experimentally. Authors in [23] discussed the progr essive 
application of nanofluids in solar collectors with different 
thermophysical properties. In addition, they evalua ted the 
performance of different types of solar collectors.  Authors in 
[24] proposed a mathematical model for the investigation of the 
effect of nanofluid concentration on PTC. They foun d that 
using nanofluids in a PTC improves its thermal effi ciency. 
Authors in [25] presented an experimental study of the heat 
transfer and friction factor of silver nanofluids i n a PTC 
receiver with twisted tape inserts. They confirmed that using 
nanofluids increases the heat transfer performance of the 
receiver. Authors in [26] confirmed that the perfor mance of 
concentrating solar thermal systems with a nanoflui d as 
working fluid has an excellent potential for power tower 
applications improving efficiency by 5%–10%. Authors in [27] 
investigated the performance of nanofluids on PTC s ystems 
and improved the efficiency by at least 5% [27]. Au thors in 
[28] presented an experimental study to evaluate th e thermal 
efficiency of a PTC using nanoparticles of alumina (Al 2O3) in 
water with a volume fraction of 1% and 3% as HTF. T he 
results showed that with nanofluid as working fluid , the 
maximum efficiencies were 52.4% and 57.7%, while for water, 
these efficiencies were 40.8% and 46.5% for 3% and 1% 
volume fraction respectively. PTC thermal enhanceme nt has 
recently attracted considerable attention. The enha ncement of 
PTC performance can be achieved by modifying the ma terial, 
modifying the geometry, and using nanofluids instea d of 
conventional base fluids. Even so, utilizing nanofluids on PTCs 
provided a positive result. These results are still  facing several 
breaking points in the method of using a HTF [29]. Finding the 
optimal configuration of various parameters, such a s receiver 
formation and geometry, receiver size and material,  HTF, and 
regulation of the maximum heat flow, is one of the most 
challenging and important research purposes for enh anced 
thermal systems to further improve efficiency and p rofitability 
through innovation in design and application of new  fluids and 
new materials. 
This work presents a three-dimensional numerical st udy of 
the thermal and thermal stress performance of a PTC . In order 
to attain this goal, the suggested approach consists of two main 
steps. The impact of the absorber tube material on heat 
transmission was investigated in the first step. The performance 
of PTC receivers was studied using a combination of  Monte 
Carlo Ray-Trace (MCRT), Computational Fluid Dynamic s 
(CFD) simulation using Ansys Fluent software, and t hermal 
stress analysis using ANSYS' static structural modu le. We will 
solve the temperature distributions in the heat transfer analysis, 
and the thermal stress analysis will use the interp olated 
temperature distributions specified at the nodes of  the CFD 
meshes as input data for the nodes. A comparative s tudy of 
numerous materials, such as copper, aluminum, and s tainless 
steel, is employed and compared to find which is id eal for a 
small-sized PTC under actual NUHF. Second, the effe ct of the 
addition of nanoparticles on the working fluid, emp loying 
Al 2O3-H2O based nanofluid at various volume concentrations is 
carried out. The computational model is developed i n Ansys 
Fluent environment. 
IV.  PHYSICAL MODEL  
Figure 1 shows the physical model considered in thi s work. 
The PTC system consists of a mirror folded into a p arabolic 
shape with a heat collecting element at its focus. In the 
numerical study, the rim angle ( ϕr) of the collector is 90° and 
the total aperture area (Ap = W×L) is 1.80m 2. The receiver of 
the parabolic trough solar collector consists of a metallic tube 
that is enclosed in a glass envelope. The absorber tube is coated 
with a selective coating that has a high absorptivi ty of the 
incoming solar radiation and a low emissivity of in frared 
radiation. The geometrical dimensions and optical properties of 
the PTC system are defined in Table I. In this work , a three-
dimensional analysis of the thermal losses and ther mal stress 
performance of a solar PTC receiver was investigate d through 
studying the influence of the receiver tube, materi al type, and 
the nanofluid used as the working fluid. To improve  the 
thermal performance of the PTC and homogenize the f lux 
distribution for flattening the temperature distrib ution, various 
types of materials were used for the receiver heat transfer 
enhancement, namely copper, stainless steel, alumin ium, and 
water containing nanoparticles of Al 2O3. 321H stainless steel 
was used for the absorber tube due to its low bendi ng behavior 
and high strength capability [30]. The thermal prop erties of 
absorber materials are given in Table II. In these conditions, the 
